# The Adventures of Bender

It starts in a town on the east side of the United States. Close to the
ocean towns of New Jersey. How did I get here. How did I wander into
this world view? That's a question I think about almost everyday. I'm
probably not a role model for anyone yet. I have a lot to work through
to finally be able to take that position. I need to be able to live my
life with a certain flow and style.

It's a lot harder to just be able to type what I want. The problem is
that I am going to keep doing what I am doing. This isn't something that
I have ever been able to give up on. 

Why are you reading this introduction? The chancs are that you either
have an immediate need to solve the riddle of knowledge work, feel
overwhelmed by your master's thesis, try to level up your blog, want to
write a book because it's cool, try to get on top as a consultant, excel
at research, or something like that. But the Zettelkasten Method is more
than just a tool to finish some work or project. It is a holistic method
on how to deal with knowledge in your life.

The Zettelkasten Method is an amplifier of your endeavours it the realm
of knowledge work. It is highly effective, and many people report they
have more fun, one even comparing it to the addictive nature of games
like World of Warcraft, and have an easier time doing knowledge work
overall. But this only comes as a result of putting in a high level of
consistent effort.

It is like swimming. If you can't swim, you won't be having any fun at
all. Swimming sucks if all you do is float (or even sink) and fight the
water. But boy, if you figure out the technique and glide through the
water, it is incredible. But you don't learn swimming by aiming for ease
and fun. You learn to swim by aiming to be fast and graceful.

The Zettelkasten Method needs some practice. First, you will have the
feeling that you don't do anything useful. But with a little bit of
practice and patience, you will surprise yourself and produce gems of
knowledge.

This introduction is meant to guide your first steps towards excellence.
Follow this path and your Zettelkasten will provide you with the tools
to thrive on intellectual adventures.

If I had to explain to someone unfamiliar with the concept of
Zettelkasten, I'f describe it like this:

> A Zettelkasten is a personal tool for thinking and writing. It has
hypertextual features to make a web of thought possible. The
difference to other systems is that you create a web of thought instead
of notes of arbitrary size and form, and emphasize connection, not a
collection.

The Zettelkasten, as we know it today, really took off with Niklas
luhmann, the godfather of the Zettelkasten Method, the most powerful too
for thinking and note taking out there.

## Luhmann's Zettelkasten

Niklas Luhmann was a highly productive social scientist. He published 50
books and over 600 articles. He didn't achieve this on his own. He had
quite a companion.

There are also over 150 unfinished manuscropts left in his estate. At
least one of them is a text of 1000 pages. So his productivity surpassed
even his already astonishing body of published work.

Luhmann humself stated that his productivity stems from working in a
partnership with his Zettelkasten. This strike a chord with people
investigating the Zettelkasten Method.

Luhmann's Zettelkasten is a collection of notes on paper slips with a
special twist: It is a hypertext that he could navigate the drawer
cabinet containing all the paper slips with a reasonable amount of time
and energy. "Reasonable" means that it was reasonable for Luhmann, who,
obsessed with his theory of society, was a workaholic and an
enthusiastic bureaucrat. A hypertext needs to be surfable. On Wilipedia.
you just need to click a link to get to the next article within
Wikipedia's hypertext. It requires more effort to follow a link if the
hypertext is paper-based. The other problem is that you need a starting
point for your ride. So Luhmann created his Zettelkasten to make his
note collection surfable. He needed entry points and a mechanism to surf
from one note to another in a productive way.

We are lucky because we have access to powerful digital tools. Handling
a physical Zettelkasten is way more difficult and labor intensice than a
digital one. We don't have to be bureaucratic workaholics to reap the
benefits of the Zettelkasten Method.

## Why Are We So Interested In Luhmann's Zettelkasten?

First, we fantasize about what it would mean to be as productive as
Luhmann. Luhmann's Zettelkasten seems to inspire people, which is one of
the main drivers why interst in his method of production is surging.

Second, Luhmann's Zettelkasten promises to be quite an improvement to
run-of-the-mill approaches to note-taking and knowledge work in general.
It amplifies your effectiveness. It is possible to produce more in less
time, but not with less effort per time. If we accept this we can imrove
ordinary note-taking methods in several ways:

1. We can improve the connectivity of our thoughts. The hyper-textual
   nature of the Zettelkasten enables us to connect ideas. These
   connections make new insights possible. Insights don't happen in a
   vacuum. They are the result of making new unexpected connections.

2. We can be more productive. The Zettelkasten Method streamlines our
   workflow by giving clear guidelines on what to do.This, in turn,
   decreases friction. It is quite common to enter a stage of flow which
   further increases productivity. I even allocate two days per week to
   make Zettelkasten work my priority and allow Zettelkasten flow to
   happen.

3. We stop wasting our efforts. Even if you don't use any of your notes
   for a project you're working on at the moment, you prepare the
   knowledge for future projects. At the very least, you improve the
   depth of processing information from that topic.

4. We can tackle more complex problems. It is very difficult to keep all
   the balls in the air if you juggle complex problems. The Zettelkasten
   Method allows you to concentrate on a small part of the problem and
   after that take a step back and look at it with a panorama vision.

5. Normal note-taking will create a bloated mess over time. The
   Zettelkasten on the other hand will scale itself automatically to the
   size of the problem you are tackling. This it what Luhmann talked
   about when he wrote about "internal growth" (I translated in into
   "organic growth") in his manual.

6. The Zettelkasten Method will make your writing easier, more coherent,
   smoother and more convincing. One of the main problem in writing and
   thinking is out limited capacity to follow one line of thought for a
   long period of time. Just think of medication. It is even difficult
   to focus on a simple thing like breathing for a couple of minutes.
   Imagine how difficult it is to think about one issue for weeks and
   months to write a thesis. The Zettelkasten will hold you r thoughts
   alive and help you to hold onto them.

We have t make notes to wrestle wit problems effectively. To put it in
Luhmann's words:

> What are we to do with what we have written down? Certainly, at first,
we will produce mostly garbage. But we have been educated to expect
something useful from our activities and soon lose confidence if nothing
useful seems to result. We should, therefore, reflect on whether and how
we arrange our notes so that they are available for later access.

The result of Luhmann's own note-taking effort was his Zettelkasten.
Let's dive in and see how he achieved this to extract some general
principles.

## The Fixed Address of Each Note

If you want to refer to an individual note, it needs to have a fixed and
unique address by which you can identify the note. It is necesary to
make the actual lookup possible. In our digital age, wer rarely think of
this problem unless we are software developers. We are used to
performing a search on the web, and in a fraction of a second, our
search presents us with the results. When you deal with a bunch of
paper notes, however, you need to make it possible and bearable to get
anywhere at all. Luhmann's approach was a clever numbering system.

The very first note is assigned the number 1. If you add a second not
that is not related to the first note, it is assigned the number 2. But
if you want to continue the first note, or inject something into its
content, comment on it, or something along those lines, you branch
off. That new note would get assigned the number 1a. If you continue
with this new note, you would go on with 1b. If you then want to comment
on the note 1a, you would create a note with the address 1a1. So, in
short, whenever you continue a train of thought, you increment the last
position in the address, be it number or a character from the alphabet.
And when you want to expand, intersperse, or comment on a note, you take
its address and append a new character. For this to work, you alternate
numbers and characters.

Luhmann's numbering system had two consequences for re-creating his
method:

1. It makes organic growth possible. Luhmann didn't use the term
   hypertext, but he probably would if he lived today. This organic
   growth is also precisely how wikis and their wiki-link feature
   works. You have a text but want to expand on a point. You branch off
   from the current page, and thus basically inject another text into
   the current one, but at the same time hide its contents.
2. It makes linking possible. The emphasis on linking is a more obvious
   hing at the hyper-textual nature of his Zettelkasten. The non-linear
   link structure is the main trait of a hypertext. In his manual on how
   to create a Zettelkasten, he wrote: It is not important where you
   place a new note as long as you can link to it.

His numbering system made a paper-based hypertext possible. It worked
with a bearable amount of effort for Luhmann.

At this stage, we have a surfable hypertext. But we do not have
something like a search engine to enter the hypertext.

